# Introduction to Object Orientation

qooxdoo allows you to easily leverage many key concepts of
object-oriented programming without bothering about limited native
support in JavaScript.

The main actors of qooxdoo OO are:

  - **Classes**
  - **Interfaces**
  - **Mixins**

When trying to get a grip of the framework code, you should probably
understand all those three concepts. As a regular application developer
you often get by with ignoring interfaces and mixins when starting and
just getting familiar with *classes*.

## Classes

A "class" is a central concept in most object-oriented languages, and as
a programmer you are certainly familiar with it. qooxdoo supports a
"closed form" of class declaration, i.e. the entire declaration is
provided within a `qx.Class.define(name, config)` statement, where
`name` is the fully-qualified class name, and `config` is a
configuration map with various keys (or "sections").

There are several types of classes available, which are specified by the
`type` key within the `config` map:

  - **regular class**: May contain *class* variables/methods (in a
    `statics` section) and *instance* variables/methods (in a `members`
    section). An instance of the class can be created using the `new`
    keyword, so a constructor needs to be given in `construct`.
  - **static class**: Only contains class variables and class methods.
    Often a helper or utility class. Use `type : "static"`.
  - **abstract class**: Does not allow an instance to be created.
    Typically classes derive from it and provide concrete
    implementations. `type` is `abstract`.
  - **singleton**: Not more than a single instance of the class may
    exists at any time. A static method `getInstance()` returns the
    instance. Use `type : "singleton"`.

## Interfaces

qooxdoo's interfaces are similar to the ones in Java. Similar to the
declaration of class they are created by `qx.Interface.define(name,
config)`. They specify an "interface" (typically a set of empty
methods), that classes must implement.

## Mixins

Mixins are a very practical concept that not all programming languages
provide. Unlike interfaces, which require a class to provide concrete
implementations to fulfill the interface contract, mixins do include
code. This code needs to be generic, if it is "mixed into" different
existing classes. Mixins usually cover only a single aspect of
functionality and therefore tend to be small. They are declared by
`qx.Mixin.define(name, config)`.

## Inheritance

Like most programming languages qooxdoo only supports single-inheritance
for classes, not multiple-inheritance, i.e. a class can only derive
directly from a single super class. This is easily modeled by the
`extend` key in the class declaration map.

Since a class may implement/include one or many interfaces/mixins, which
themselves can extend others, some advanced forms of
multiple-inheritance can still be realized.

## qooxdoo OO standalone

If you want to use qooxdoo OO layer standalone take a look at [Server](/server).
