# @ignore

pages/development/api_jsdoc_ref#ignore is a very powerful construct that
probably deserves a bit elaboration on the reference information.

## Variadic Arguments

Like many @-hints @ignore is capable of a variable number of arguments. So
instead of writing :

```
@ignore(foo)
@ignore(bar)
```

you can write :

```
@ignore(foo, bar)
```

to the same effect. (Of course you can also have two separate @ignore entries if
you prefer that).

## Double Relevance

More importantly, @ignore has relevance both as a compiler hint but also for the
lint checker. Using @ignore means

> - don't warn about this symbol if you cannot resolve it (for the lint checker)
> - don't include this symbol and its dependencies in the build (whether it is
>   known or not â€“ for the compiler)

### Silence Lint Only

So [\*@ignore](mailto:*@ignore)\* will affect both lint and compile jobs, which
is usually what you want. You only want lint not to warn you about a symbol in
your code if you know you don't need to take any action to provide it when the
application is created. (Otherwise you would want to be alerted about that by
lint). But that effectively means that the symbol can be left out from the
build, and the compiler can safely skip it.

But if you actually have symbols in your code that are provided by another
contribution or library which are not known to the _lint_ job, it is not a good
idea to simply add `@ignore(...<symbols>...)` in the affected classes, as then
you would also skip those symbols when building the application, which might
result in a broken app.

Rather, to just cover the _lint_ behavior modify the configuration for the
`lint` job in your _config.json_ by adding the missing top-level symbols:

```
"jobs" : {
  "lint" : {
    "lint-check" : {
      "allowed-globals" : [
        /* add symbols here that lint should ignore */
      ]
    }
  }
}
```

## Name Globbing

@ignore supports globbing in a rather strict way. Already the old # ignore
supported globs like _#ignore(foo.\*)_ to ignore entire namespaces, but also did
some automatic globbing when it thought that _ foo_ was actually a class and not
a namespace. The effect was that _ #ignore(foo)_ would also ignore _foo.getBar_
when this looked like an attribute reference on a class object. (As you can
imagine the problem lies in the term "looked like". This decision could be
safely made for known classes but not for unknown symbols. In an unknown _
foo.bar_, is _bar_ a nested namespace or a class attribute?!).

[\*@ignore](mailto:*@ignore)(foo)\* will ignore _foo_ and only _foo_ . If you
also want _foo.getBar_ be ignored either list it explicitly (as in
[\*@ignore](mailto:*@ignore)(foo, foo.getBar)_) or use a wildcard (as
in_@ignore(foo.\*)\*) which will ignore both.

## Scoped Application

Most importantly, @ignore is _lexically scoped_. This was a major requirement,
and one reason to integrate compiler hints with the JSDoc system. When people
used an unknown symbol in one method, they wanted to ignore that specifically
for that method and not globally for the whole file. As a consequence, using the
same symbol in a sibling method you would again get an "Unknown global symbol"
warning which was desired. This was not available with the old #ignore.

So if an unknown name is found in a particular line of code, a lookup happens to
the next enclosing lexical scope if this name should be ignored. If there is no
such information in the enclosing JSDoc comment the search is repeated upwards,
e.g. in the JSDoc preceding the class definition. If necessary this is repeated
all the way up to the top-most JSDoc, which effectively takes the place of the
old # ignore hint. So the old functionality is covered by a simple replacement
of the different comment blocks, but the new system also allows a much finer
control.

This scoped look up is not the case for other compiler hints like e.g. @require
or @use which still scope over the entire class file.
