# Models

The model is the centerpiece of data binding. It holds the data and acts
as an integration point for the [stores](stores) and for the [controller](controller). 
Almost all models are plain qooxdoo classes holding the
data in simple properties, which are configured to fire events on every
change. These change events are the most important part of the models
and the reason, why plain %{JS} objects are not enough as models. The
same is true for native %{JS} arrays. Since they do not fire events when
items are changed as well, a complementary array is added for data
binding purposes. More details about that in the [data array](#data-array) section.

Still, there is no need to manually write own model classes for every
data source you want to work with. The marshallers provide a smart way
to automatically create these classes during runtime. Take a look at the
[JSON marshaller](#json-marshaller) for details.

In the following sections, we first take a look at the models basics and
how they work. After that, we dig into the role of arrays and how that
is solved. As a last section, we check out how the model creation is
done in qooxdoo, because you don't need to write all the simple models
yourself.

## Structure

As already mentioned in the introduction of this chapter, models are
plain qooxdoo objects. The main idea of such a model is to hold all data
in properties, which fire change events as soon as new data is
available. Lets take a look at a simple example in which we use JSON
data to demonstrate how models look. The data in the example looks like
this:

    {
      s: "string",
      b: true,
      a: []
    }

A corresponding model should now be an object, which class defines three
properties, named `s`, `b` and `a`. Lets take a look at the following
qooxdoo code, in which we assume that we have a fitting model:

    var model = new ExampleModel(); // this returns a fitting model
    model.getS(); // return the value of the property 's' which is "string"
    model.setB(false); // will fire a change event for the property 'b'

I guess it's clear now, how models are structured. There is not much
code or magic about them, but they are the most important part in the
whole binding scenario.

## Data Array

If we take a second look at the example we used above, we also added an
array as value of property `a`. This array should not be an plain %{JS}
array, instead it should be a qooxdoo data array, which Class is located
in `qx.data.Array`. The reason for that should be quite obvious right
now, the binding needs to get an event as soon as some data changed to
do all the necessary updates. As regular arrays can't offer such
notifications, we added our own array implementation to the data binding
layer. The data array is as close as possible to the native array but in
some core things, we needed to change the API. The major difference is
the accessing of items in the array. The following sample code, based on
the sample above, shows the differences:

    var array = model.getA();
    array.setItem(0, "content"); // equals 'array[0] = "content"' and fires a change event
    array.getItem(0); // equals 'array[0]' and returns "content"
    array.length; // like the native API and returns '1'

You see, the read and write access needs to be done with the designated
methods to ensure the firing of the events. But all the other API, like
`push`, `pop` or `splice` is all the same and also capable of the
events. Just take a look at the [API-Documentation of the
array](apps://apiviewer/#qx.data.Array) for
more information.

## Importance of events

The two sections above explained how models look and why. The most
mentioned reason is the need for change events, which gives them also an
important role in the data binding. Check out the `separate page about
events in data binding<events>`.

## Disposing

Those of you familiar with qooxdoo and its objects should know, that
disposing is necessary. This is also true for model objects and data
arrays. The model objects do have one special thing, the do a deep
disposing, when created with the marshaller, which we get to know in the
following section.

## JSON Marshaller

The marshaller takes care of converting JavaScript Objects into qooxdoo
classes and instances. You can initiate each of the two jobs with a
method.

### toClass

This method converts a given JavaScript object into model classes. Every
class will be stored and available in the `qx.data.model` namespace. The
name of the class will be generated automatically depending on the data
which should be stored in it. As an optional parameter you can enable
the inclusion of bubbling events for every change of a property. If a
model class is already created for the given data object, no new class
will be created.

### toModel

The method requires that the classes for the models are available. So be
sure to call the `toClass` method before calling this method. The main
purpose of this method is to create instances of the created model
classes and return the model corresponding to the given data object.

### createModel (static)

This method is static and can be used to invoke both methods at once. By
that, you can create models for a given JavaScript objects with one line
of code:

    var model = qx.data.marshal.Json.createModel({a: {b: {c: "test"}}});

## How to get my own code into the model?

What if you want to to bring your own code to the generated model
classes or if you even want to use your own model classes? That's
possible by adding and implementing a delegate to the data store. You
can either

  - Add your code by supporting a superclass for the created model
    classes.
  - Add your code as a mixin to the created model classes.
  - Use your own class instead of the created model classes.

Take a look at the API-Documentation of the
[qx.data.store.IStoreDelegate](apps:/apiviewer/#qx.data.store.IStoreDelegate)
to see the available methods and how to implement them.
