# Stores

The main purpose of the store components is to load data from a source
and convert that data into a `model <models>`. The task of loading data
and converting the data into a model has been split up. The store itself
takes care of loading the data but delegates the creation of model
classes and instances to a marshaller. More information about the
marshalling and the models itself can be found in the [models](models).

## JSON Store

The JSON store takes an URL, fetches the given data from that URL and
converts the data using the JSON marshaller to qooxdoo model instances,
which will be available in the model property after loading. The state
of the loading process is mapped to a state property. For the loading of
the data, a `qx.io.request.Xhr` will be used in the store.

The following code shows how to use the JSON data store.

    var url = "json/data.json";
    var store = new qx.data.store.Json(url);

After setting the URL during the creation process, the loading will
begin immediately. As soon as the data is loaded and converted, you can
access the model with the following code.

    store.getModel();

## JSONP Store

The [JSONP](http://ajaxian.com/archives/jsonp-json-with-padding) store
is based on the [JSON store](stores#json_store) but
uses a script tag for loading the data. Therefore, a parameter name for
the callback and an URL must be specified.

The following code shows how to use the JSONP data store.

    var url = "json/data.json";
    var store = new qx.data.store.Jsonp(url, null, "CallbackParamName");

After setting the URL and the callback parameter name during the
creation process, the loading will begin immediately.

## YQL Store

YQL is the [Yahoo\! Query Language](http://developer.yahoo.com/yql/).
Yahoo\! describes it as *"\[...\] an expressive SQL-like language that
lets you query, filter, and join data across Web services."* Based on
the [JSONP store](stores#jsonp_store), qooxdoo
offers a YQL store, where you can specify the YQL queries and qooxdoo
handles the rest.

The following code demonstrates how to fetch some twitter messages.

    var query = "select * from twitter.user.timeline where id='wittemann'";
    var store = new qx.data.store.Yql(query);

## Offline Store

The Offline store uses HTML local or session storage to store the data
on the client. That can be used for offline storage as well as for other
storage purposes on the client. You should use the
[environment](/core/environment) checks to make sure that the used storage
technology is supported by the environment you want to run your code in.

The following code demonstrates how to initialize the data store.

    if (qx.core.Environment.get("html.storage.local") {
      var store = new qx.data.store.Offline("my-test-key", "local");
      if (store.getModel() == null) {
        // initialize model ...
      }
    }

## Combining with controllers

As described in the section above, you can access the model in the
property after loading. The best solution is to use the model with a
controller and then bind the model properties with `Single Value Binding
<single_value_binding>` together. The code for this could look something
like this.

    store.bind("model", controller, "model");

Using the `Single Value Binding <single_value_binding>`, the binding
handles all the stuff related with the loading of the model data. That
means that the data will be available in the controller as soon as its
available in the store.
