About
=====

qooxdoo (pronounced ['kuksdu:]) is a universal JavaScript framework for creating
enterprise grade single page web applications. With its class based
objectorientation  qooxdoo allows to keep even the code of the most complex
applications well organized and manageable. The integrated compiler produces
single file applications ready for deployment.

Framework
---------

The qooxdoo framework enhances the javascript language with a full fledged class
based oo system, including a powerful properties system and mixins. Qooxdoo is
largely based on namespaces to allow for easy integration with other libraries
and existing user code. It comes with a [comprehensive API
reference](http://api.qooxdoo.org) that is auto-generated from Javadoc-like
comments in the framework sourcecode.

Qooxdoo are written in plain javascript, no new syntax is introduced, all the
extra functionality is realized through clever application of existing
javascript abilities. In order to create an application that can be loaded by
the browser, the qooxdoo source code has to be processed by the qooxdoo
compiler.

The qooxdoo compilers is a node based application written in qooxdoo itself. It
loads qooxdoo source code and adds all the required framework components
necessary to create an application that is executable in the browser.

GUI Toolkit
-----------

Despite being a pure JavaScript framework, qooxdoo is on par with GUI toolkits
for desktop application like Qt when it comes to advanced yet easy to implement
user interfaces. It offers a full-blown set widgets that are hardly
distinguishable from elements of native desktop applications. Full built-in
support for keyboard navigation, focus and tab handling and drag & drop is
provided. Dimensions can be specified as static, auto-sizing, stretching,
percentage, weighted flex or min/max, or even as combinations of those. All
widgets are based on powerful and flexible layout managers which are at the core
of many of the advanced layout capabilities.

No HTML or CSS has to be used and augmented to define the interface. The qooxdoo
developer does not even have to know CSS to style the interface. Clean and
easy-to-configure themes for appearance, colors, borders, fonts and icons allow
for complete themability.

Communication
-------------

While being a client-side and server-agnostic solution, the qooxdoo project
includes different communication facilities, and supports low-level
XMLHttpRequests (XHR) as well as an RPC API. An abstract transport layer
supports queues, timeouts and implementations via XHR, Iframes and Scripts. Like
the rest of qooxdoo it fully supports event-based programming which greatly
simplifies asynchronous communication.


qooxdoo was originally developed by one of the world's leading web hosters 1&1
Internet (now part United Internet AG). In late 2015 the qooxdoo framework with
all its assets was turned over to the qooxdoo association, located in
Switzerland. Qooxdoo development has since then been lead by a group of
dedicated developers congregating on [gitter](https://gitter.im/qooxdoo/qooxdoo)
and [github](https://github.com/qooxdoo/qooxdoo). Contributions are always
welcome.

Contact
-------

qooxdoo.org<br/>
Aargweg 17<br/>
4600 Olten<br/>
Switzerland

Email: [info@qooxdoo.org](mailto:info@qooxdoo.org)
